---
slug: "/earth-observation"
title: "Earth Observation Applications"
---

Earth Observation Satellites of ISRO has been successfully able to establish many operational applications in the country. Both at Central and State level, there are large number of users who utilise space based inputs for various purposes. Some of the important missions of ISRO, in terms of IRS series of satellites, that has enabled unique applications of space based imaging are, Cartosat-1 & 2, Resourcesat-1 & 2, Oceansat-1 & 2, Risat-1, Megha-Tropiques, SARAL, Scatsat, INSAT series, and host of other satellites. ISRO is in the verge of realising next generation of these satellites, as part of continuity of missions, to ensure that the user community is continuously benefitted from space inputs for sustainable development and good governance.

The hallmark of Indian space programme is the application-oriented focus and the benefits that have accrued to the country through these programmes. The societal services offered by Earth Observation, SATCOM and the recent NavIC constellation of satellites in various areas of national development, including tele-education and telemedicine, are standing examples of applications oriented space programme of India. Remote Sensing applications projects at National, State and Local levels are being carried out through a well-established multi-pronged implementation architecture of National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS) in the country. The architecture of space programme in India emphasises on the applications, with active participation of user-community from Government, Academia and Industry. During past many years, Indian Remote Sensing Satellite constellation has taken giant strides in ensuring many areas of application, operational. Some of the most prominent ones are Agricultural Crops Inventory, Water Resources Information System, Ground Water Prospects, Forest Working Plans, Biodiversity and Coral Mapping, Potential Fishing Zones, Ocean State Forecasts, Rural Development, Urban Development, Inventory & Monitoring of Glacial Lakes / Water Bodies, Location based Services using NavIC constellation, Disaster Management Support Programme (Cyclone and Floods Mapping & Monitoring, Landslide Mapping & Monitoring, Agricultural Drought, Forest Fire, Earthquakes, Extreme Weather Monitoring and experimental Forecasts and so on).

Geospatial technologies, remote sensing, satellite communication and navigation systems are providing many new ways for effective management of natural resources. This has resulted in enabling variety of data and information products for societal benefits and also helping planners and decision-makers to embark upon unique people-centric services. Web Geoportals and mobile technologies (Bhuvan Geoportal) are the other popular platforms, being used by Governments, to provide information services and solutions at all levels, which are proving to be effective. The Government system has successfully adopted  to use such technologies for the benefit of people at large. ISRO works closely with Central & State Government departments/ ministries, Industry and Academia in ensuring best of solutions for optimal management of Natural Resources, support services for good governance and societal development. Through a well-coordinated effort, this system has been able to provide several important applications that are becoming people-centric today.

[Agriculture & Soils](/about)
